# Ryanair priority boarding

I was recently on a Ryanair flight in which I had priority boarding. I believe the events that occurred on that day are worthy of being written. What follows is the story of my boarding experience, alongside an analysis of the benefits of Ryanair’s priority boarding.

As you may know, priority boarding allows you to go to a special line when boarding the airplane, which is the first to enter the aircraft. At first, this might seem tempting (everyone wants to be first), but I argue that this should be replaced by a “late boarding” where you can be the _last_ to enter (I’ll explain this idea more at the end of the post). For now, let’s focus on the events that happened.

My story starts when I was on the line to board the Ryanair flight that was departing from Arlanda airport, near the city of Stockholm. I was in the priority boarding line, which had around 10 people before me (maybe 10 more after). To embark the plane I needed to hand my citizen card to the nice lady (which I did, once it was my turn), as well as pass my ticket through the digital reader (which I did to). This, however, only allowed me to pass the automatic doors that led to a small waiting area. This small wait area had a passenger’s ramp that led to the airport apron (the area where the airplane is located), but the gate was closed – I couldn’t reach the airplane. Since the doors I just passed were waist-high and transparent I could see the regular passengers on the other side of the doors. After 2 or 3 minutes of waiting, all of the priority passengers were with me in the small waiting area. And we just waited there. About 5 minutes after, the most surreal thing happened: the non-priority passengers start to go through the doors; to the same waiting area I was in! Naturally, after a few minutes, we were more than 150 people in the, now fully packed, small waiting area, all with just a few centimeters from one another.

At this point, I want to stop the recording of the events to comment on this scenario. First, did not Covid teach us anything? Can’t we just continue to keep the 2 meters distance from strangers in public spaces, please? Second, why am I with the non-priority passengers? I don’t want to give the impression that I think too high of myself and cannot be in contact with non-priority passengers – I actually got the priority boarding unintentionally. I think it was either because I bought 2 seats together (my girlfriend hates flights and being with me makes her feel better – I still wonder why) or because I added cabin bags to my flight. The point is, if you have priority boarding why are you in a small waiting area with the non-priority passengers? There’s not even a line to enter the plain at this stage! We’re just all there… anyone can be the first to board, unless you mark your spot near the entrance door, which I did not do (and even that does not guarantee you’ll be the first).

Moving on with the story, I think you can pretty much expect what happened next. Once the gates to the passenger’s ramp opened (which lead to the airport apron), everyone just rushed in their direction. Like wild animals. I bet you were, at least once, in a similar situation, for if you never were on an airplane before, you can get a similar feeling when you are to enter a fully booked bus or train. It was just like water flowing through a pipe that had only enough bandwidth to let pass 1 or 2 droplets at a time. With great effort and perseverance, I was eventually able to pass through the gate, which led me to the airport apron, a few meters away from the airplane, but I still had to walk the boarding stairs to reach the airplane. It was raining and, alas, since I wasn’t the first on the newly formed line (by far), I was just there waiting, below the grey skies of Sweden, receiving rain slaps on the face – what a treat!

I eventually entered the plane (at last!), but I still had to put the cabin bags in the cabin, which, as you may also know, people occupy it with their jackets, backpacks and handbags; so, you may not have space to put your luggage in the cabin just above your seat. It was not my case this time, fortunately. In hindsight, I wish it was harder to store the bags, as it would have given more content to this story, but real life not always goes as you want, so let’s end the story at this point, as what happened in the flight is, frankly, boring, and thus not really worth telling.

Now, let’s unpack this story and see if priority boarding at Ryanair (or any priority boardings with an experience similar to this one) are really worth it. Spoiler alert: they are not. From the story you might already have a good picture why that is, but let me walk you through it in more detail.

I’ll start with the first stage of the story (I call it “the trap”), which happened when I was one of the first to be jailed in a small waiting area. I intentionally used the word “jailed” since I’ll refer to that small waiting area as “the cage”. The name is shorter than “small waiting area” and, in my opinion, more accurate of what that small confined space really is. What is the advantage here (I’m assuming priority boarding is supposed to give you some sort of benefit over the regular passengers, as it is more expensive than the regular boarding)? You are one of the first to go to the cage? You just get trapped there without bathrooms, access to food (unless you happened to bring some) and nowhere to go – you can’t go back (the staff won’t let you) and you can’t go forward (as the gate is closed). Compare that to the regular boarding passengers. They are in the big waiting area, which gives them access to the rest of the airport. They are free to go to the bathroom, buy something to eat, and even run away if they are having second thoughts. So, at this stage, I can’t really see any advantages, unless you happen to have a knack for cages.

On the second stage of my story (I call it “the clogging”) the regular passengers were also sent to the cage a few minutes after me. Now, if you are just a regular passenger, you can keep yourself out of the cage for longer (which seems preferable to me) – just be the last in line. You can even be seated in one of those airport chairs while you wait and see the line progress. Once everybody is trapped on the cell, it is your turn to enter. You have the same destined as the other passengers, but at least you minimized your time in the cell. However, if you are a priority passenger, you just become further trapped as each regular passenger fills the empty parts of the cage. You are just a siting duck, waiting as the cell you are in is being clogged up. It’s like being inside a ship while it sinks _vs_ being a spectator in the shore. Who do you think is in a better position?

Let’s unpack the final stage. This one I call it “the race” since you have to race for the gate faster than the other passengers. We’re back to natural selection here, where the stronger and fittest prevail. Money is of no use here, for you have left civilized society. At the time this happened in the story, I was asking myself the question “what’s the use of priority boarding?” for the nth time, which I wasn’t able to answer at that point. This time, however, I had found the answer to that simple question, which seemed unanswerable until then! The answer is: it gives you a _chance_ of being on of the first to board. Not a guarantee, but a chance. And people spend lots of money on chances – people pay for having a chance of winning the lottery, and this was what this was! But how to maximize this chance? Personally, although I didn’t try this empirically, I think you have to, first, position yourself right in front of the gate, as this will ensure that you are in an advantageous position to race for the finish line (the airplane). But you still have to walk the passengers ramp to find your way to the airport apron, where you have the final boarding stairs that lead to the airplane. Here you have two options. If you are fast, you can run and keep your winning position; if you are not, however, try to block the passage of others, as they may try to pass you by. To do so, use your cabin bags (if you have any) to occupy more space, or if someone’s going with you, tell them to walk/run alongside you (not behind or in front of you), as this helps prevent other passengers of overtaking you. If you are reading this while you are yourself in one of these situations, go luck! Try to use fair game, but if someone one overtakes you, slightly tackle them, but make it look like an accident.

## Replacing priority boarding with “late boarding”

I believe priority boarding could be replaced with what I call “late boarding”, which consists in boarding when all the other passengers are already seated in the plane. Just imagine yourself reading a book while drinking a cup of coffee in a nice comfortable chair within a spacious waiting area when you hear a speaker with a soft voice saying “We would like to inform you that everyone is seated on the aircraft. You may now come, late boarding passengers.”. Wouldn’t this be awesome? You reduce to almost zero the time spent on lines with random strangers in close proximity (there are other late boarding passengers) while enjoying whatever it is you like to do.
